---
layout: post
title: "Are psychedelics of some utility? -Deeper Insights"
date: 2018-05-27
---
I have always believed in *“when it looks like it has been done effortlessly, hours of effort went into thinking.”* So it was very natural for me to ponder upon how thinking really happens and what manipulates it. It then came to me that the “stuff” does it. Enhancing or limiting, good or bad, is the “sober” the sense of perception that was final and truly the state we had been designated to live in? If psychedelic was to enhance the self why is it empirically found to be addictive? Is doing psychedelics just another form of hedonism and a mere “pleasure seeking” activity which could perhaps explain the part that it does become addictive.  I had never thought about it until couple of Himalayan treks and peers in their 20’s ready to experiment served as a trigger. Everyone around me was stoned. Was the answer as people called “FOMO” fear of missing out on the recent trends in the millennials which all of us had to catch up in order to not be left behind? The psychedelics as people call stuff “weed, marijuana, hash, LSD” are just leisure? The question was why do people do weed? For what? What does the weed high make them achieve? Is it for everyone? The answers I got were fairly trivial. Couple of them in fact had a constant theme which circled around few points. I was more interested in why do people do weed for recreation rather than use of weed for medication if any. Anyway, the answers were like it gets you high, lets you focus on certain thoughts with more clarity, makes you lose/alters perception of the world in certain way which isn’t really something people might find attractive. It could make sense as an escape from the given chaos of life problems. But so does alcohol which is somewhat legal alternative of the psychedelics in a quid pro quo. The proponents of psychedelic “stuff” legalization have their own despise about alcohol but most of the time people do combine both. The drinkers do smoke occasionally and smokers do drink sometimes. The answers seemed to just scratch the surface of whole situation. And given me being the doubting Thomas me I thought about looking into the questions with lenses of both philosophy and neurosciences. And thus began my research voyage to find if some answers rest within the realms of cognitive psychology. Precisely tackling the question how do the psychedelics affect the chemistry of brain?  How does a mind under influence of the marijuana work? Maybe some understanding beyond scratch of how mind works in general throws light on how does marijuana enhance certain aspects of our cognition by limiting the others. 

The way our mind was modelled it is very reasonable to say that the utopian is a state of consciousness of single thought. Needless to say that this utopian state has elusiveness and intricacies attached to itself. The state of consciousness is very powerful and mind in “sober” is usually taking up and multitasking so much of information that there is sometimes an overload of it. It is fairly undisputed that stoners behave silly and outlandishly dumb. That’s how we spot a high. Someone who is absent minded and blissfully unaware of present. Marijuana or to be more specific its active ingredient Delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the ingredient that makes people act silly in different situations that require rational thought and linear thinking. Then saying that the marijuana may act as a trigger for insights that are very profound is counter intuitive. Although the behaviour of individuals often resembles that of geniuses when they are stoned in the sense that most of times the geniuses are very absent minded. This is because they are so profoundly involved in the nitty-gritty bits and evaluation of their ideas or thoughts that their mind as little or no attention of what is going around them. Which is similar to that of stoners that they also have no idea of what is going around them. This serves as a perfect case of correlation equals causation that the minds are generally involved in thinking of some thought in profound manner it will help in having a deep insight. Or otherwise stated that the marijuana when helps us be unaware of the surroundings can cause us to think and arrive at some quantum leap insights. 

Most of us know how absent-minded and silly highly intelligent people can sometimes act in everyday life. They are acting ***‘stupid’*** because they are thinking – profoundly and productively – about something that is not really relevant to the present situation, thus using a limited amount of ***‘processing speed’*** for other everyday tasks. Of course, the infamous absentminded professors are the towering figures for this phenomenon. A prototypical case would be that of the legendary absent-minded genius MIT mathematics professor Norbert Wiener, who was once stopped on campus by a student with a mathematical problem. After answering his student’s math question, Wiener asked: *“In which direction was I walking when you stopped me?”* The student answered him, indicating the direction where his professor had come from. *“Ah,”* Wiener declared, *“then I’ve had my lunch.”* The absent mindedness is generally a trait sometimes even independent of high intelligent academia also. I remember most profoundly is when I was thinking about a problem and my mother had brought coconut water in a glass which was there for me since morning. Eventually every time she used to cross the living room that glass kept there unattended and still full used to boil her. So in the evening while cutting vegetables she became so furious eventually she started shouting at me for leaving the coconut water there since morning. *“Will you come here and drink this god damn water or I kill you”* she angered. I came over so confused with what she was referring to stand there in contemplation. Not to mention this confused stare with no action taken from my side had a very obvious reaction. *“Now who are you waiting for? Will you drink it?”* she showed no calm. I took the bowl and drank the water she was using to wash the vegetables. Acting stupid in certain scenarios isn’t acceptable to the people who are observing us. They do not understand whether the person is going through profound contemplations at a point of time. We all must have one such act of absent mindedness when we were profoundly thinking out solutions to some problems. The catch here is that the people who smoke do contemplate profoundly or they sometimes have a flood or thoughts that might make them overwhelmed of which thought to ponder on but one thing is definitely given. The thoughts which come to mind under effect of marijuana are not filtered. They can be worthless thoughts to ponder upon. From an external perspective, the absent-minded often look silly because of their poor performances with simple everyday tasks, be it sober or under the influence of a psychoactive drug but as two edged sword it helps in hyper focusing. Trivially thinking you can put your resources in distributed manner to think about and multitask or use all resources for a problem to gain a new insight. So it means that if marijuana helps us to hyper focus will it be something that when used profoundly help us gain better insights to our problems? Wrong.

Over time many of famous personalities have confessed of using weed. A very popular anecdote for effects of marijuana comes from the famous American astronomer and famous science communicator and Cornell Professor, Carl Sagan, co-author and presenter of the TV-show “Cosmos” attributed an insight he made while being high.
*“I can remember on one occasion, taking a shower with my wife while high, in which I had an idea on the origins and invalidity of racism in terms of Gaussian distribution curves. (…) One idea led to another, and at the end of about an hour of extremely hard work I found I had written eleven short essays on a wide range of social, political, philosophical, and human biological topics. I can’t go into the details of those essays, but from all external signs, they seem to contain valid insights. I have used them in university commencement addresses, public lectures, and in my books.”*

If it’s true that marijuana is the real cause of such insights can be debated heavily. Of course Sagan made an observation while being high of treating origins of racism in terms of Gaussian Distribution Curves but then it is highly unlikely that the insight might have been totally dependent on marijuana being the reason. What if someone for the heck sake has no clue about what Gaussian Distribution Curves are? If Sagan was to be taken by his word of mouth let’s consider this genius had said that he visited Hawaii and had relaxed near the beach to calm down his mind and to focus on a single thought. In general role Hawaii plays is not that interesting in retrospect of the insight which Sagan had. To attribute that the high caused Sagan to think so would be a dubious claim. It would be similar to us saying that had we been under the tree and apple fell on us we would have discovered gravity like newton or to have a similar insight would require us to make apples fall on head!

There are couple of reasons why I am being harsh critic of the fact that marijuana causes deep insights which otherwise are very easily debunked by our normal consciousness. In times were the smokers are guilty of doing something which is illegal and morally incorrect from the perspective of society. It is very obvious that they will have urge to come out clean and build a rationale behind their actions. Therefore the value of insights on life that are claimed to be experienced by the people on effect on marijuana. It is very likely that it somewhat wishful thinking. Consumers just delude themselves into believing they have more insights under marijuana, while in fact, there’s no such effect. There is last reason for scepticism for empirical and anecdotal evidences that marijuana has abilities to enhance our insight seeking capabilities. The subjective feeling that the consumer may have of their insights being very valuable are well in fact subjective in their opinion. It is well known that marijuana intensifies sensations like taste or hearing or even touch, so under marijuana, a consumer might generally tend to overrate his own ideas, making them “bigger” than they are. It is also a fact that our short-term memory gets disturbed under the influence, so maybe many reports of insights go back to this “wow”-feeling of an insight under marijuana, a feeling that gives much more importance to a creative thought than it would under sober conditions. The consumer when sober again has not much memory of the semantics of the ideas that he had envisioned and is only left with the feeling of awe.
It has been my conclusion up till now from the articles that I read over google scholar and other philosophical dissertations and scholarly works. I understand that it is an iterative process and I only wish to document whatever I have found till now.

